The theme I would like to address this morning is guard against materialism, and I invite you to take another look at our day text in Matthew chapter 6 and verse 24.
Here, a couched in the sermon on the Mount Jesus addressed his disciples and the crowds with an all-inclusive truth. Notice how that verse begins.
No one can slave for two masters.
Are there any exceptions to that rule? According to Jesus, according to Jehovah God, no exceptions.
But who are the two competing and very different masters that Jesus was referring to?
The end of the verse answers where he refers to God and riches.
Did you notice that riches is presented here in the Bible with a capital R to begin?
Now that's interesting when we notice Jesus' other references to riches in the New World translation, where the R is not capitalized.
Lowercase riches. For example, when Jesus refers later to the deceptive power of riches that can choke the word lowercase R, or when he referred to unrighteous riches that we need to use wisely, lowercase R.
So why here in Matthew chapter 6 and verse 24, and in the parallel account at Luke chapter 16 and verse 13, did the New World translation Bible committee choose to capitalize the R?
Well, the study edition of the New World translation helps us here.
It tells us that Matthew chapter 6 and verse 24 that the Greek word used here is traditionally translated Maman.
That could also be rendered as riches or money. And then the comment adds this gem.
It says that in this verse, riches is personified as a master or a kind of false God.
Well, we've seen that to be true, haven't we? For generations, humans have tended to elevate riches, good old money, riches, lowercase M, lowercase R, and they've elevated it to be a God that has, as our commenters commented on, enslaved millions.
What was the teaching Jesus was highlighting for his followers? It's that we Christians cannot give God the exclusive devotion that he deserves, and at the same time be devoted to gathering up more material possessions.
That's a very strong warning. So that leads us to two questions that we could consider with the balance of our time this morning.
What is materialism and how can you and I guard against falling into that snare of gathering up more riches and making this our God?
Miriam Webster's dictionary offers this definition of materialism. It's a preoccupation with or a tendency to seek after or stress material things rather than intellectual or spiritual things.
But I found a definition in the publications of the faithful slave that I think is even better for all of us. In the context of Jesus words, the 1978 yearbook on page 9 expressed it this way.
It has been said that materialism is anything that stands between a person and his worship of Jehovah. So it need not necessarily be an expensive automobile, an ostentatious home or a large bank account, it could be anything that absorbs a person's time and attention so that he neglects the worship due to Jehovah.
Well, that's the point, isn't it? That Jesus was trying to stress for his followers. Could materialism entrap any of us who have chosen to put Kingdom interest first and have made material sacrifices in order to do that?
Well, that question prompted me to think of a faithful servant of Jehovah outlined in the Bible book of Jeremiah, Barak. Open please to Jeremiah chapter 45.
Now, as we think about the faithful servant, Jeremiah and his secretary, Barak, we can imagine that they made considerable sacrifices to serve the interests of Jehovah's people at that time.
Barak had a special privilege of service as do most of us here today, but something distracted him. Notice please the reading in Jeremiah chapter 45 and verse 3.
Here, Jehovah pinpointed what Barak had said, perhaps only in his heart, only in his own thoughts.
Verse 3. You have said, woe to me for Jehovah has added grief to my pain. I am weary from groaning and I have found no resting place.
Barak was tired. He'd been serving Jehovah faithfully, but his assignment was difficult, perhaps stressful. And it was going to be 18 more years until the foretold destruction would come.
But was it his service to Jehovah that was really the problem? Notice what Jehovah identified as we read verse 5.
But you are seeking great things for yourself. Stop seeking such things.
Those great things could have been material things. It could have been that he was ensnared by materialism.
If that was the case, Jehovah's warning to stop seeking such things was timely. Later on in that same verse Barak was reminded that his life, not his possessions, not his things, was going to be the spoil that Jehovah was going to provide at the upcoming destruction.
Well, how can we guard against falling into the snare of materialism? Like Barak, we from time to time need to take a long hard look at our personal view of money and personal things.
The September 2015 issue of the awake magazine posed some questions for self-examination. Here's just a few of them. Am I attracted to get rich quick schemes? Do I find it difficult to be generous with my money?
Does money make me feel important? Am I always thinking about money? Is my attitude toward money adversely affecting my health and family life?
You know, real life experiences among our brothers and sisters proves that we all need to be thinking seriously about this matter.
Alex, one of our brothers got caught up in trading in the stock market, thinking he could soon quit his job and enter the pioneer service. He was well motivated.
But he got caught in a vortex of studying offers and market reports. He used his savings and his money borrowed from brokers to buy stocks that the analysts had predicted would quickly rise in value.
Do you know how the story plays out for Alex? Months passed. The stocks never rebounded. Alex lost his savings and ended up having to sell his home.
What a painful consequence to being deceived by this cruel master money.
Alex reflected on what took place and he said this. I caused my family great pain. I now know that anyone who puts his trust in Jehovah's in Satan's system will be profoundly disappointed.
There was another experience of a sister valentine from Jamaica that caught my attention when I was researching this point.
You may remember the article that was published in the January 1st 2006 issue of the watchtower bringing up eight children in Jehovah's ways was a challenge and a joy.
Our sister related experience that involved her view of material things. Now we keep in mind she was not well to do financially. Imagine a mother of eight.
The husband has abandoned her. She's raising them to serve Jehovah. But does the fact that we may have a little financially speaking me that were immune to the trap of materialism.
In 1988, Hurricane Gilbert devastated the island. She wrote this.
We left our home for a shelter and a safer place. During a lull in the storm my son and I left the refuge area to survey the wreckage that was once our home.
While poking around in the debris, I spotted something I wanted to save. Suddenly winds were howling again. But I still held on to what I had salvaged.
Her son spoke up. Mom, put down the television. Are you lots wife? Our sister commented that that comment from her son caught her.
Returned her to her senses. She dropped the rain soaked TV and they ran for safety.
Sister Valentin did a self examination. She thought about what took place at that moment. She says I recall how I risked my life for a TV.
But it warmed her heart that her son had the spiritual insight to provide her a warning at the right time.
Well, it's a good lesson for all of us, isn't it? No matter what our economic situation may be, we need to view money as a skillful tool and use it for that purpose, but not allow it to rule or control us.
We do not want to stab ourselves all over with many pains.